Hello, my name is Vladislava Drudko.
I am the Director of the Department of Program for Leadership and Personal Effectiveness,
certified Master Trainer.
I have 20 years of experience in business training,
10 years in the position of a top manager in large financial and insurance companies.
Today, as part of the program Organizational Behavior,
we will consider the concept of a group and a team and group dynamics,
as well as get acquainted with the stages of the development of the team and the distribution of roles in the team.
Today there are a lot of disputes about what a group is and what a team is.
Many believe that these concepts are very interconnected,
and the group is called a team, and the team is called a group.
Our task is to understand what is the difference between a group and a team.
We often use these concepts as interconnected,
but there is a significant difference between them.
What are the similarities and differences of a team?
Is it always necessary to create a team at certain stages of the development of the entire company?
Or is it enough to just do a group interaction?
Let's first define the concepts of a group and a team.
Please pay attention to the first slide and the concept of a group given by Shine and Bennis.
A group is a number of people who interact with each other,
psychologically recognize each other and perceive themselves as a group.
And a team is a group of people who share responsibility for the results of the organization's activities.
Please pay attention to the key word that distinguishes a group from a team.
This is responsibility for the results of the organization's activities.
You can see the main differences between a group and a team on the suggested table.
You can notice that a group from a team is separated by the size limit,
common goals, role distribution, transparent and understandable interaction between team members and teamwork.
Let's consider the concept of a group and a team using the example of a management company.
A management company has a financial department headed by a financial inspector.
This company has a relatively limited number of employees
who follow a common, understandable and acceptable goal.
The tasks, roles and responsibilities are clearly distributed between them.
We call the financial department a team.
Again, because these people are connected by a common goal, transparent communication and distributed roles.
However, this financial department is part of a large management company,
where there are many other departments.
For example, the personnel department, the personnel department, the sales department, the selection department, and so on.
The employees of each of these departments are not united by a common goal,
and certain tasks are not distributed between them.
They simply realize themselves as part of a whole, as part of a large organization.
Therefore, we call the employees of different departments in one management company a group of people.
If we go further and pay attention to the top managers,
to the managers of these departments, who gather for weekly meetings,
plan their work, plan their work,
plan the activities of the whole organization, follow the common goal of the company.
We call the top managers a group of top managers.
Thus, you can learn for yourself once again that the group of top managers is distinguished by the key words.
These are the following words, the following words are the following words,
the following words are the following words,
What do teams need?
Teams are needed in those situations when a large number of work is needed.
When this work is not possible for one person.
Also, in the situation of uncertainty and changes, team work increases efficiency.
Because when the roles are distributed and people clearly understand the goals,
the stress level is noticeably reduced.
This means that interpersonal communication is more transparent, more understandable, and therefore more comfortable.
Let's look at the example of a team and a group on two sports teams.
On a baseball team and on a basketball team.
If you remember the rules of the game in a baseball team,
the members of the group are relatively independent of each other and never interact together.
Thus, it is a group of athletes.
But in a basketball team, the rules are completely different.
The members of the group constantly interact with each other on the field,
run, defend, attack, score.
When a new player comes out on the field, the team members must play with him.
Thus, basketball is a sports team.
Let's now pay attention and consider the criteria for the effectiveness of the team's activities.
Please pay attention to the proposed slide.
There are only five criteria for the effectiveness of the team's activities.
You already know some of them.
The task, planning and setting goals.
If there are no clear and transparent goals in the team,
if the work is not planned for the future,
if the team members do not know what specific task they are performing,
it reduces the effectiveness of the team's work.
The roles in the team.
Each member of the team understands what role he plays.
We will talk about the roles a little later.
The process of the team's functioning.
Interpersonal relations.
Relations between teams.
So, the main criteria for the effectiveness of the team's activities.
You can see these criteria on the proposed slide.
There are only five of them.
Let's briefly discuss each of them.
The task, planning and setting goals.
This is a very important point to create an effective team.
I often go to other companies as a consultant.
It is always interesting to ask a question to the employee.
Why do you come to work in this particular company?
70% of employees answer that they want to do anything,
but not what is related to their personal goal or business organization.
Anything is related to their close relationship with the company,
good social status,
the company has a good reputation in the market,
a car is on loan, and so on.
The goal for the employee, the goal and the task set
is the first step to increase his motivation to work in the group.
It is believed that setting goals increases the efficiency of work by 16%
due to motivation.
I will give you a simple example.
In my training, there are participants who learn the rules of setting goals and planning.
I put a trash can in front of them and ask one participant to roll up as much paper as possible
and throw it into the trash can.
The participant tries to crush the paper,
throwing it into the trash can,
not understanding what I want from him.
When he finishes this work,
and I notice the time before he starts throwing the paper,
I ask the next participant to do the following work.
In 5 minutes, after throwing the paper into the trash can,
we counted the number of paper thrown, there were 15,
we need to throw more than 15 papers.
Guess how the second participant behaved in the training,
to whom I clearly outlined the time and the number.
He got a drive.
He began to rush to throw as many as possible 15 rolled papers.
When he really did the exercise and threw more than 15 papers into the trash can in 5 minutes.
When I stopped the exercise,
two participants who took part in this game were in different emotional states.
Which of them was more offended by me?
Of course, the first one. Why?
I asked him a question.
You are now in a very uncomfortable state. Why?
He did not answer.
Vlad, you did not set a clear goal in front of me.
You did not tell me the number.
And I did not understand what you wanted from me.
You see, a clearly outlined goal in time, space and quantity
will always motivate your employees to achieve something.
Therefore, remember that one of the important criteria for effective work in a group
is setting goals, planning and assigning tasks.
So, the roles in the team.
The roles in the team are the distribution of responsibility between the members of one team.
Who, why, when, why, who is reported to, and who gives whom what tools or documents.
The next criterion is the process of team functioning.
At this stage, it is very important to discuss, talk to people, talk to subordinates,
meet with them as often as possible and give them feedback as much as possible
and ask them what is going on.
The process of team functioning determines the norms of behavior of employees in one team,
the type and style of decision-making, methods of motivation and punishment.
As for how often you talk to your subordinates,
the last and probably the most recorded answer I heard from one of the managers of the sales department
was once a quarter.
I asked him the next question, how effective is the sales in your department.
I believe that the participant Slukavil said that it is very effective.
Although, a big question arises,
can a team be effective if it sees its manager once every three months?
We are talking about people who wish and enjoy being in the company.
We all grew up in a family, we all grew up in the environment of people,
and therefore the models of human behavior are connected,
no matter where he is in the organization or wherever he is,
to the need and need for socializing, communication, feedback and the ability to share your feelings.
If you use this policy of meeting with your subordinates once a quarter,
I will also have a question for you.
And the last criterion is the relationship between teams.
This is a very important criterion for the effectiveness of the work of one team.
Why?
Today in business, very often one team within a large corporation or company
greatly affects the effectiveness of the work of another team.
Let's take a simple example.
The sales department has clear global plans for the interception of clients and competitors.
Accordingly, to implement these plans, the sales department needs a certain number of good, cool sales.
The sales department is traditionally addressed to the personnel department.
The personnel department has many important tasks,
because each department has its own specific plans.
And you know that the shortage of personnel always exists with good personnel within any company.
And so the sales department is addressed to the personnel department with an application
to select a certain number of sales managers with certain competencies.
Accordingly, the tasks of the sales department are different,
because there are many other departments.
It is very important how well people communicate with each other and how well they can agree.
This can also be a part of the team.
Usually, in companies that pay great attention to the increase in the effectiveness of the work of employees,
when new projects are created,
for example, the project that I just mentioned in the sales department
is a new project.
Therefore, very often companies gather a team of employees of the personnel department
and employees of the sales department for the so-called team building.
And there they learn to live together.
After they try new role models in training,
build interpersonal relationships,
return to their usual life, it is much easier for them to agree.
Because in business there are not only formal policies and procedures,
but also interpersonal communication.
So, now we have considered the main criteria for the effectiveness of the team's activities.
I will give you one example,
which was once presented as an experiment at the University of London.
The experiment was called an intergroup conference.
What was done?
Employees were divided into two groups of participants and a consultant was assigned to them.
The consultant was not a facilitator and a leader of this group,
he just observed the work and the behavior of the participants
and expressed his critical and non-critical assessments to each participant.
What was happening in the group?
Since there was no established leader in the group,
the goals and tasks were not clearly defined,
why people were gathered here.
The level of anxiety increased noticeably.
And the behavior of people was accompanied by a very high degree of aggression,
even hysterical laughter.
People began to express unpleasant things to each other.
Then they tried to change the consultant.
And after the failed attempt to change the consultant,
as usually happens in a class where there is no good teacher,
employees found a release goat in the group
and began to place all their aggression on this person.
Therefore, part of the team just self-eliminated.
Nobody wanted to be a release goat,
so people just froze and did not express any emotions at all.
The experiment ended there.
As a result, people did everything they wanted,
but did not study their own behavior.
I told this example to those above-mentioned criteria,
which I just commented on.
It is very important that if there are no clearly defined goals,
roles, tasks, and roles of the leader,
we will talk about this in a separate course today,
interpersonal communication will never be built.
And if there are no goals in the team,
and interpersonal communication is not built,
it cannot be effective.
So, dear, we will move on with you.
We have already learned about the criteria for the effectiveness of the team's activities,
and we have analyzed each of them in detail at the example of the group conference.
Now we will get acquainted with what group dynamics is.
The word dynamics itself is an antonym for the word static.
Let's turn to the slide and get acquainted with the definition.
What is group dynamics?
Group dynamics is the designation, unlike the group statics,
of a set of dynamic processes that occur simultaneously in a group
for a certain period of time,
and which are the movement of the group from stage to stage,
that is, its development.
Well, probably, it is not a secret for any of you that movement is life,
and a person develops only by means of movement.
Let's try to observe how the development of a group or a team occurs.
We will consider this on the model of Tuckman,
the most popular model in business,
which is often used,
which outlined the four main stages of the development of a group,
the development of a team.
Please pay attention to the proposed slide.
You may notice that there is an uneven distribution of the graph,
and it moves not along the rising, but along the descending trajectory.
So, the first stage of the development of a team is formation.
What is formation of a team relative to those criteria
that we have just considered in detail?
At the stage of formation of a team,
people treat each other very carefully and carefully.
People look at each other,
make a conscious or unconscious choice
who they are with, why they are there,
whom they trust in the team
— it is not a team yet, in a group —
whom they do not trust.
What happens at the stage of formation of a group?
There are no clearly defined goals,
there are no clearly distributed roles,
interpersonal communications are not built,
despite the fact that there are no conflicts in the group,
the group exists quite calmly,
however, there are hidden, yet unexpressed conflicts
within each employee, within each individual.
I repeat, people treat each other politely,
but this is a signal for you, as for the leader,
to think that politeness at the stage of formation of a team
is not a success,
it is a behavior, a natural behavior of a person
who is still making a conscious choice
who he is going with, what he is going for,
and why he is doing it.
So, at the stage of formation,
there is a certain style of management.
I think you, as a leader,
should learn this style as a rigid and directive one.
At this stage, the leader is a bright,
pronounced leader.
The style of management is directive,
the tasks are clearly set, there is clear control.
There is no place for delegating powers
and opportunities to interact,
consult and ask.
The leader positions himself as a leader
so that at the next stages of the development of the team
it is easier for him to manage,
and the next stages will be more difficult.
The task of the leader is to provide all the resources
for the comfortable functioning of the team.
Here you can recall the motivational model of MacGregor
or Herzberg, who said that until you satisfy
the basic hygiene needs of a person,
they will feel anger.
But if you satisfy these basic hygiene needs of a person,
such as working conditions,
decent salary, airy hygiene,
and the ability to eat during lunch,
if you satisfy these criteria of the employees,
it does not mean that they will work better.
They will simply lack the feeling of dissatisfaction
or, as I said, the feeling of anger.
It is very important for you as a leader
not to meet once a quarter with your employees,
as I told you in the previous example,
but to make these meetings as often as possible.
The smallest, simplest,
the most inconspicuous achievements
must be supported and praised by the employees.
The smallest, I emphasize,
because at the last stages of the development of the team
these achievements will be more large-scale.
And for such small achievements,
which you praise at the stage of formation,
it will no longer be a motivation for the employees.
So, after you go through the stage of formation,
the storm stage comes.
This is one of the most difficult periods
in the development of the team, in the dynamics of the group,
when people begin to express their emotions openly.
At this stage, there are a lot of conflicts in the group,
aggressiveness is very high,
people do not agree with their colleagues,
people express confrontation
with any ideas.
It is very important for you as a leader
to learn how to manage a conflict situation
and manage it in a way
that does not mean to prohibit expressing your opinion,
to prohibit arguing or to prohibit being aggressive.
I mean aggressiveness in the permissible limits,
when employees do not throw cups or phones at each other,
but aggressiveness at the level of constructive emotions.
Your task at this stage,
within the framework of managing the conflict,
is, on the contrary,
to support aggressive emotions
and to pull them out of people,
to get them to express their disagreement
or their opinion openly and freely.
This is the main key task of the leader
at the storm stage.
It is clear that we are approaching
a different style of management.
If we said that at the stage of formation
you are direct and tough,
you just say, set tasks and demand their execution,
then at the stage of management,
when conflicts arise,
people begin to express their opinion openly.
Here your task is not just to set goals or tasks,
but to explain to people why this is happening,
why each of them needs it.
As for the control function,
if at the stage of formation
the control function is total,
then at the storm stage the control function is step-by-step,
that is, after a certain period of time.
People should understand that you give them an opportunity
to express themselves within the framework of this group.
And I repeat,
it is necessary to provoke an open explanation of the relationship.
This is very useful,
because if at this stage you forbid people
with policies, procedures, rules and norms of behavior
an open explanation of relations,
it will definitely emerge at the next stage,
and you simply will not be able to go from the third stage
to the fourth stage.
You will have to return to the storm stage.
We will look at this further.
So, the storm stage is when people have agreed,
when they understood and saw you not only as a tough leader,
but also as a leader who advises,
explains and agrees on priorities.
Your team comfortably moves to the next stage of its development,
which we call normalization.
What is the difference between this stage and the previous two?
I have already said that the main key moment
when people start to understand each other
and understand each other's needs
is when people start to calm down.
Negative emotions are replaced by positive ones.
People begin to trust each other more.
And now all the decisions they discuss and make
are not painted with such a dark stain of negativity
as it was at the storm stage.
This is very important.
And you, as a leader, must remember this.
At this stage, norms and rules are formed.
When people have calmed down,
when they have worked out all their emotions,
it is time for logic.
People begin to develop standards of interaction,
to develop norms and rules of life.
They are distributed spontaneously.
The roles of the team's interaction are distributed.
Please pay attention to the slide.
With each subsequent slide,
you will see a number of key words in red.
At the stage of normalization,
the style of your management,
please note,
you must provide solutions to the group.
If at the directive stage you did not provide solutions,
but pointed out harshly,
at the storm stage you agreed on your decisions,
now you provide solutions to the group.
The group has calmed down.
It can act outside of emotions.
It can act constructively.
Therefore, at this stage,
it is necessary to give more freedom to creativity.
It is very important to praise not only for small successes.
This does not motivate employees to achieve success.
You need to praise for victories.
And, of course, it is not easy to publicly announce this.
As we said, not once a quarter at meetings,
but as often as possible.
And it is necessary to celebrate.
This is a very important moment for the formation of a team.
Celebrate victories.
How can you celebrate them?
It is a fantasy for your creativity as a manager.
It is a very important moment for the motivation of your subordinates.
Let's go back to the McGregor model.
If you satisfy simple hygiene factors,
the conditions of work, salary, airy room,
and provide them with food,
people will not feel high motivation to achieve success.
They will come to work and consider it necessary to act
for the salary you pay them from 9 to 6.
If we move to another topic,
we will talk about the role of the manager.
The manager is a person who is responsible
for the recognition of their merits,
the ability to make independent decisions,
and responsibility for the work.
The stage of celebration of the victories of employees
is related to the recognition of merits
and achievements of employees.
Therefore, do not forget to do this.
And, of course, do not forget to celebrate.
It is very important.
Do not close your office and do not leave it once a quarter.
I had one training participant
when we discussed which room,
which space you would like to occupy
regarding your subordinates.
It was also the department of sales.
The head of the department of sales said
that you should have a quick exit and quick entry.
That is, you wanted to leave,
you quickly left, you quickly closed.
A separate office.
Do not limit yourself within a separate office.
Be with people as a leader.
And thus you will not only provide
the opportunity for their development.
You understand that by developing your subordinates,
you will not only develop yourself,
but also your subordinates.
You planted the grass, covered it with a film
and left for three quarters.
You quickly closed your office,
quickly left, removed the film and looked.
Who grew, well done.
Who did not grow, threw it away.
This is the wrong way.
When all procedures are clearly written,
all roles are distributed,
interpersonal relations are built between people.
Please pay attention to the proposed slide.
Employees are proud not for themselves,
but for their team.
They express their respect and gratitude
to the members of their team.
The key word here is high level.
People are not afraid to bring their list of clients
to the CRM system.
You know that CRM systems are very difficult
to implement in companies.
The question is why this is happening.
In the companies that I worked for,
maybe I was not lucky,
the CRM system is not fully implemented.
The question is why it is not implemented.
I am told by the managers of the sales departments
who work with clients,
with large corporate and retail companies,
that managers do not bring their clients
to this base for a certain reason.
Why would I bring my client?
Someone will sell a parallel product,
he will see this client and use my contact.
And then go and prove where and why.
Let's talk about trust.
If you have lived through all the stages correctly,
and your team has reached the stage of action,
the key word is that trust is formed
between employees
towards each other and towards you as a leader.
Therefore, the main tasks of your manager
at the stage of action
are the following.
The following slide is the control of the result.
If you remember,
at the stage of formation it is total control,
at the stage of storm it is step-by-step,
at the stage of action it is control of the result.
You trust your employees.
You don't need to control the letters
they wrote in the slide,
where they put a comma before they go to the presentation
You trust them.
Please note that the final decision,
the elimination of the process
and participation as one of the players
is only at the stage of decision-making.
That is, you fully delegate the functions
as a leader to your team.
Again, because you trust them.
So, dear listeners,
we have just started the four stages of the development of the team.
We call it the group dynamics.
Any team follows and develops
according to the proposed TACMAN scheme.
This can be transferred not only to the business team,
but also to personal life and personal relations.
Any relations
go through certain periods of their development.
Each period is very useful and very important.
You don't need to worry
when conflicts arise in your team.
You need to work with them.
You don't need to worry when people in your team
self-isolate and remain silent.
You need to work with it.
When you gather a new team and new people
and your employees politely smile at each other,
you shouldn't be proud that you are doing well.
So, excessive leadership and insufficient leadership.
These are two key problems
that a leader faces
when he tries to manage a team.
There are consequences of excessive leadership
and consequences of insufficient leadership.
So, dear listeners,
the consequences of insufficient leadership
and the consequences of excessive leadership.
I think each of you has a lot of experience
in your professional life.
Not only as a leader,
but also as a member of the same team.
What can happen to you
if your leader,
having misused the management style
for the development of you and your team,
uses the style of excessive leadership?
What are your assumptions?
What about your initiatives?
When you offer something,
do you say, no, you should do it this way?
Of course, it falls down right away.
What about your emotions and attitude towards your boss?
Of course, you feel anger and resentment.
You feel that you are not understood,
that you are not listened to,
and that you are not respected.
But the main thing is that when you,
or your boss, controls you excessively,
you start to get used to him.
You start to feel complete dependence on him as a leader.
Let's check your assumptions
and your correct or incorrect answers.
It is also very good.
The main thing is that you work with it.
Pay attention to the following slide.
The consequences of excessive leadership.
Complete dependence on the leaders.
Lack of initiative.
Lack of professional growth.
Anger and resentment towards the leader
who, as you think,
is the leader,
causes you all kinds of resentment and obstacles.
What about the situation of insufficient leadership?
When the leader does not control the process to a lesser extent.
Do you remember I told you about the grass
that was sown, covered with a film,
and then removed and looked at who had grown.
What do you think can happen?
Always remember an interesting example.
Probably, each of you was a student
and passed the exam at a respectable, smart professor.
When you answer your question to the professor,
he has two tactics.
One is that he sits and actively,
covering his eyes, supports your idea, your topic.
You feel great.
You understand that you are moving on the right path
and you are igniting.
Or the professor who sits,
is silent and looks at you.
And you start to lose your confidence.
Are you speaking the right way?
Are you moving in the right direction?
Why is the professor silent now?
That's right, dear listeners.
If you do not interact with your subordinates enough,
if you do not exchange with them the essence of the work,
if you do not give them feedback,
if you do not give them critical feedback,
they lose their confidence.
They are afraid to take the next steps in their work
because they do not know if they have taken the right step.
The confidence of the employees in their work is greatly lost.
Of course, the work is not always done as you would like.
You sowed, you left, you came back.
I said that you should do it this way.
The work will not always be done as you want.
Because you have a completely different understanding
of what a well-done work is.
Do you remember Einstein's theory of relativity?
What is one minute?
Sitting in a hot pan for one minute is terribly long.
Standing with your beloved person in the evening by the fountain is very little.
The same is true here.
You have a completely different understanding of what a well-done work is.
Therefore, people will probably try to do the work,
but not as you would like.
If, unlike the previous case,
employees feel anger and resentment,
suppressed aggression,
here they feel complete disappointment in their work.
Because they do everything wrong,
they have a low self-esteem,
but they do not feel that they are doing more,
and that is good.
Remember the statistics of the Gallup Organization.
They say that after studying a huge number of hundreds of thousands of people,
they came to the conclusion that people come to business,
but leave.
Guess who?
Of course, the manager.
Before moving on to the next topic of the role in the team,
let's briefly consider the curve of change proposed by Adams and Hobson.
The curve of change is a visual indicator
of how changes affect the psychology of the person,
employee,
or the psychology of the behavior of the entire team,
of your entire subordinate team,
of each individual employee,
and, in general, of you as a manager.
So, the first stage,
pay attention to the slide,
the first stage is called shock.
When a person encounters
some catastrophic changes in his life,
he experiences such emotional constriction.
They say that this way his body tries to prepare his mind
for further development of the event.
But you can see from the graph that it is very tense,
this dynamic.
So, the shock stage is emotional constriction.
You often hear in everyday life,
when a person learns some incredible news,
he says the following phrase,
I'm in shock.
This is exactly what we are talking about now,
and this is exactly the true feeling that a person experiences
when he encounters catastrophic emotional events.
When a person plays in the Olympic Games,
we also fall into a state of shock, constriction.
However, this is only the beginning of the process of change
that occurs in a person,
in a separate person,
or in the whole team as a whole.
The next stage is denial and anger.
After a person has experienced a shock,
he enters into open aggression,
he begins to blame himself, others,
for not being able to foresee this earlier,
why we did not notice that you are to blame for this,
I am to blame for this, the whole world is to blame for this,
the coach is to blame for this.
He begins to reveal all kinds of emotions that a person has.
This is the stage of aggression.
He is experienced exactly after the shock and denial stage.
So, when a person is emotionally exhausted,
he goes to the next stage of change,
to the stage of bargaining.
When he begins to reason about what happened in the past,
what has already happened,
he will never be able to return to this.
The stage of bargaining is an opportunity to make the last attempt
to return to the previous initial events
that a person experienced before the stage of shock and denial.
However, the stage of bargaining ends very quickly,
it is an inevitable process,
this is how changes go through,
I have already told you about this,
all people, each person, a group, a team, and whole nations.
A person goes to the next stage of change,
this is depression.
This is a clear understanding that what has happened
before the moment of depression
will never happen again.
People are always reluctant to part with the past models of behavior,
with the past way of life,
and with the previous experience,
this is how the human psyche is built.
That is why one of the most difficult changes you see,
it is at the lowest point of self-esteem of a person,
at the very minimum point,
this is the most difficult process.
This process can be experienced not only by a person,
but also by a team.
When a team goes through a stage of change,
you will know more about this in the next courses,
when a team goes through a stage of change,
they go through depression in the most difficult way.
This is the period when teams disintegrate.
A very strong leader is needed here,
who can support, inspire people,
and accept them in a depressed emotional state.
If a person, a group or a team,
a nationality,
lives through a stage of depression,
a logical emotional realization comes,
that we will never return to the past,
what has already happened,
and we need to live on with the new thing,
that life has brought us.
This is the stage of acceptance of change.
It is not necessarily accompanied by an emotional outburst,
it can be a humility of a person,
that this is a new stage of life,
and I start to live in a new way.
This curve of change is very effective
and lives in companies all the time.
Remember that the curve of change
is accompanied by constant stressful situations.
Every time a person, a group or a team
experiences incredible stress emotions.
I know that very proactive companies,
that are preparing for rebranding or launching new products,
spend 80% of their budget on training,
not a very good word,
but they use it for training,
for employees on managing stress,
on stress management.
Because at every stage of change
people, teams and groups experience stress,
and stress needs to be managed effectively.
Then at the stage of depression,
losses of human resources and financial companies
will be minimal.
Everything related to stress,
you will learn about it in our next courses.
How stress affects the development of a company,
and how it affects the development of a company.
So, within the framework of group dynamics,
we will discuss the next sub-topic,
which is called the roles in the team.
Before that, we have learned about the stages of development of a team.
There are four of them.
We have learned about the curve of change,
which is inevitable at every stage of development of a team.
Now we will learn about the roles in the team,
and how to effectively distribute and select these roles.
It should be noted that the effectiveness of any company
depends on how effectively microgroups and microteams work.
How to build them,
and how to make them effective.
This question was asked by Western specialists in the late 20th century.
They studied the group dynamics,
and studied the roles in the team,
which affect the effectiveness of the results.
And here is the most interesting discovery,
which is being used very actively in business today,
not just at the level of tests,
but also recommendations,
which belong to Belbin.
This is a model of the roles in the team.
What did Belbin do?
He studied a huge number of models of behavior and functioning of various teams,
and found out that each person in the team plays two roles.
One of them is functional,
that is, it is associated with the direct position or the specific work of the team.
The second role is less obvious,
but it turns out that it plays a bigger role in the team's effectiveness.
As a result of the study, Belbin identified 8 roles in the team.
Now you see all the listed roles on the slide.
Let's try to get to know each of these roles in more detail.
Perhaps you will recognize yourself in one of them,
perhaps you will recognize your subordinates, your colleagues in one of them.
Now we are listening to the material of this course,
and we will think about which roles are present in your team.
Probably, some roles may be missing,
and at the end we will talk about whether it can be done.
So, 8 roles in the team.
One of them is the harmonizer of relations.
The harmonizer of relations,
the word itself, is a very important factor.
All the names translated from English are very close in their lexical meaning
to what this person does in the team.
The harmonizer of relations is a person who is tuned to interpersonal communication.
He is a patron, he interacts, he always calms everyone down,
he is very comfortable with him,
he supports everyone, he is sociable,
he is a person of the soul.
However, in his weak spot, in critical and crisis situations,
these people usually feel very uncomfortable,
tense, and often cannot withstand long,
critical and oppressive situations.
I thought that the motto of the harmonizer of relations
probably belongs to John the Baptist.
When you feed the poor,
you consider yourself a good person.
The next type in the team is a specialist.
The word itself says that this person
is highly professional and very independent.
He is proud of his work,
and it is clear that this role also has its less strong sides.
He is not a team player.
You probably met such people in the team.
He is a specialist, he knows his job well,
he is a very good communicator,
he is a specialist, he knows his job well,
he does not feel pleasure
from close interpersonal interaction.
He is an introvert.
Probably, the words of Lev Tolstoy
will suit him best.
Knowledge is a tool, not a goal.
A person is a process person,
focused on the process of work.
The next type in the team is a researcher.
He is a producer, he is transferred in different situations.
The essence does not change.
He is a resource researcher, an extrovert enthusiast,
who creates and supports a huge wide network of contacts
and very skillfully uses the ideas of other people.
There is only one weak link,
a weak spot of the resource researcher.
You probably met such a person
in the team and even in the company.
He quickly ignites, quickly unites everyone.
Then, by the end of the evening,
his enthusiasm goes out.
He quickly goes out of enthusiasm.
What motto can be come up with for such a resource researcher?
Probably, it will be appropriate to say the words of Friedrich Engels,
which can be translated into the mouth of a resource researcher.
Ideas ignite each other,
like an electric spark.
The next role in the team is an assessment controller.
The word itself, the assessor, the controller,
the lexical meaning of this word combination
gives you a clear profile of this role.
This is a serious critic.
This is a person who is practically never motivated by anything.
He is always ready to help in all situations,
in all matters.
In all situations, in all matters that arise in the team,
in the group, in the company,
he always has a critical feedback.
This is a person, as a rule, who has a very high intellect.
It is clear that if the intellect was not high,
the person would be a critic,
he would be just an aggressive person.
And when a person has a high intellect and, at the same time,
he criticizes, it is more appropriate to call him
a critical controller.
Probably, there were such people in the team,
and not only in the team.
What can be a choice for an assessor controller?
Probably, measure with a micrometer, mark with chalk,
chop with an ax.
Do everything carefully.
The next role in the team is a quality guarantor.
I pay attention to the lexical meaning of the word.
A person who performs his work very well.
I emphasize, his work.
It will be a person who is an introvert,
whose energy is directed inside him.
He is very attentive and detailed to the smallest details.
He always completes the task.
He can be assigned any task,
and you can forget about it,
because he will always do it.
He always delegates the tasks assigned to him to other people.
Why?
Because he always doubts the effectiveness
of the work of other people compared to himself.
He is not a team player,
but at the same time he performs the assigned task
very efficiently and efficiently.
What can be said about the quality guarantor?
Either don't take it, or finish it.
The word coordinator speaks for itself.
It is a person who delegates authority very effectively.
He knows how to motivate and support other people.
He is very confident.
As a rule, each person has his own strengths and weaknesses.
We will talk about it in the next course.
People who can use, delegate,
and encourage other people,
their personal intellectual abilities
are not so high compared to an assessor or a specialist.
It is his less powerful side.
Now you can think about
how to assign a role of a coordinator to a task more effectively.
An analytical, report,
or a project.
Or just to connect people in one team.
The answer is clear.
The motto of a coordinator can be quite simple.
A friend of his praise, you praise yourself.
The next role in the team is an activator.
He is a driver.
He has a high level of energy.
The meaning of life and work
is a constant overcoming of difficulties.
Where there are difficulties,
there is an activator.
It is a life elixir for him.
As with any role, an activator has his less powerful sides.
He is a very energetic person, an extrovert.
He is very easy to be criticized,
to be aggressive.
He is very emotional
and often conflicts with his colleagues.
This is his less powerful side.
And the motto of such an activator
can be the words of success.
It is an ability not to lose enthusiasm,
to move from one failure to another.
The last role in the team is an idea generator.
This is a person who is able to offer
original, non-standard creative ideas.
This is his strong side.
This is a feature and an advantage of this role.
However, he is also quite individual,
quite serious
and neglects the basic principles
of creativity.
If a person is creative,
then all the routine work,
all the standards,
all the procedures and rules
will be critical for him.
There should be no boundaries in creativity.
You can think about the stage of the development of the team.
We talked about formation, storm,
formation.
The idea generator will be the most effective.
By the way, you can think about each role in the team.
It should be noted,
according to Belbin and as practice shows,
that one person,
one employee in the team
can play several similar roles.
It is clear that an activator and a specialist
are completely opposite roles.
They cannot combine in one person.
We talked about similar roles,
coordinator and activator.
It can combine in one person.
According to Belbin,
the more accurately you select
your team members
according to the above roles,
the more effective the team will work.
Let's consider the absence
or excess of certain roles in the company.
What does it affect?
How can it be eliminated?
First, look at the matrix.
Each role, which we have just described,
is oriented either to the task
to a greater extent
or to the team creation,
or to the relationship.
According to this matrix,
four roles, which are oriented to the task,
such as specialist, controller,
guarantee of quality, generator of ideas,
work with tasks and are more individual.
And, accordingly, harmonizer, coordinator,
activator and resource finder
are more oriented to the relationship.
If specialists, controllers,
guarantee of quality and generators of ideas
are selected in your team,
where can your team go?
Of course, it will be ineffective
for one simple reason.
It will have a poorly built interpersonal relationship.
People will close each other only in their work.
Moreover, work can get stuck
not on strategic, but on tactical tasks.
Competitors will overtake you quickly.
Even if you have a generator of ideas,
there will be no person in your team
who can build these ideas,
promote, convey and build relationships
between the three previous types.
Or let's take another extreme.
When you have selected a team
and have a good interpersonal relationship,
it often happens when the leader
is quite communicative,
he often selects people
who are very similar to him.
Thus, a team of harmonizers,
activators, relations builders is selected.
A very strong emphasis is placed
on interpersonal communication.
A long time ago,
a great phrase was said
that good relationships
don't always lead to positive business results.
Thus, a team with a good relationship
with the help of these roles
will be ineffective only because
people will talk and communicate nicely.
There will be no one to work.
I will give you three examples.
Each of them has a certain
skew in the selection of roles.
The first example is Shmel.
The company exists on the market
for about 12 years.
I'm talking about a virtual name,
but also about a virtual business direction.
All three examples I'm going to give
are from real life situations
and real business.
I've worked with them as a consultant
in the reorganization of the organization
and formation of an effective team.
Shmel has been selling telecommunications
for 12 years.
The main problem of this company
is the obviously built-up
competition between the team members.
People compete with each other,
not with their competitors.
At the same time, there is an irresponsible
attitude to work and obvious gaps
in the organization and planning.
When the diagnosis was made,
the investigators were used,
including Belbin.
One of the most simple and effective
in processing the results
is Belbin's role in the team.
One of the test methods was used
by Belbin's investigator.
If you close the right half of the slide,
you will probably say without me
what roles were missing in this team
and how we replaced them.
A person who can control
and execute the work
from the beginning to the end
is a professional.
It is a critic, an assessment controller
who can give assessments
based on his experience.
I told you that a person with high intelligence
should be able to give assessments
based on the situation.
As soon as the team was filled with these roles,
it became more effective.
The competitors were surprised
what happened.
The next company is Doctor.
It is a company that produces unique pharmaceuticals.
What is the problem of this company?
The company has been in the market for 25 years.
The main problem is
the establishment of interpersonal communication
that provides for the interaction of the departments.
Unique pharmaceuticals
are in the only implementation in Russia.
There are good partnership relations
with Europe and Asia.
People produce their own pharmaceuticals.
There are no competitors in the Russian market.
The main problem is the absence of certain roles.
Very complex interpersonal communication.
As soon as the team was filled with the necessary people,
the coordinator, harmonizer and activizer were added.
The team became more effective.
What is more effective?
The idea generator
who calmed down without interpersonal communication
began to generate more ideas.
The ideas became more vivid,
more advanced
and more effective.
The interpersonal communication
was built differently.
The third company is
IT solutions development
and their sales to partners.
The company has been in the market for 10 years.
The main problem is
the duplication of functions.
IT specialists work there.
The functions are duplicated
and are often focused on non-urgent
and non-important tasks
and not on strategic ones.
When the company was measured,
the diagnosis was made
that there were not enough creative people
who could extract resources
and generate creative ideas.
After some time,
the company did not immediately bring two people
and broke all sales records.
Remember the curve of change I showed you?
When new people and new roles join the team,
the team experiences this stage of change.
The team must be ready
to face the fact that
people who have lived in the same way
for a long time
and when at least one new person joins the team
and if he plays another role,
all the team members experience this stage of change.
The efforts of you as a leader
and a manager
should be tripled.
However, I think that at every stage
the efforts of a leader are the same.
Dear listeners,
let's sum up the roles in the team.
You have just listened to a short excursion
about 8 roles in the team.
I remind you that you can use
the existing surveyors.
You can share them with your team members
and they are easily processed.
Thanks to them you can see the profiles of your people.
The surveyor marks the leading and secondary role
of each player of the team.
According to the managers of the teams
I work with for a long time,
the surveyors are needed for the first and second iterations.
Then a person gains experience,
and without using the surveyors
he or she intuitively starts to calculate people
by their roles in the team.
Even during the selection of the personnel
when they conduct interviews with their candidates
they understand that at this stage
the harmonization of relations is missing.
Therefore, during the selection
when the team is looking for specialists
they pay attention to the qualities
that are characteristic of harmonization of relations.
I repeat, even without the existing surveyors.
I remind you that they are available on the market
and you can use them.
The last part is the feedback.
If we go back a few steps
to the beginning of the course
when we talked about insufficient and excessive leadership
I noticed that your attention was focused
on the fact that you need to communicate with your subordinates
constantly.
The problem is that we don't always know
how to give the right feedback.
We have a mentality of communication
of the post-Soviet space.
When a person or a subordinate makes a mistake
or acts in the wrong direction
we usually express our indignation and comments to him.
He or she listens carefully
and says that he or she will not repeat this mistake again.
I consider it a mistake
and he or she may not consider it a mistake
because he or she tried.
The probability of a mistake is high.
A person will feel emotional tension
and emotional fear
because he or she is afraid
to make the next mistake
because you will call him or her again
and report to him or her.
There are more modern methods of feedback
when communication is not about me talking to you
but about the interaction of two sides.
The feedback is not about me expressing my comments.
The feedback is about your opinion
and how we can fix it together
in order not to repeat the mistake.
In order to effectively give feedback
and interact with subordinates
in the process of group dynamics
when people are at different stages
of change curve
when people feel stress
when they make mistakes
there are three basic rules.
You can see them on the slide.
The first one is to give the employee
an opportunity to realize his or her behavior.
In other words
I call my subordinate
Fedya Ivanov
who is three days late
in order to avoid
repeating the mistake.
A person who feels emotional tension
will continue to be late.
There is another type of feedback.
I report that for three days
I don't see you at your workplace.
You are late.
I want to understand what is going on.
Tell me about it.
You need to give the person an opportunity
to tell what is going on.
The subordinate tells you
that he takes his child to kindergarten in the morning.
He can't bring it earlier
because the kindergarten is still closed.
He is late for work.
The next step is
to analyze the consequences of his behavior
together with the subordinate.
How critical they are
to the business processes of my unit.
If they are very critical
and we analyze it together with the subordinate
we move to the third step
and agree on the consequences.
The second step is
to show the consequences of the behavior.
In our case, the subordinate is late three times in a row.
I think that in my unit
it critically affects the business processes
because I have clear formal procedures.
No employee is ever late
because everyone is fined for being late.
I have a right to fire an employee
after three official notes.
It is critical for the person
and for the business processes
because I lose a specialist.
I explain the consequences
of his behavior.
We move to the third step
when we agree on how we will act.
I allow him to come to work at 10 am
and he will leave at 7 pm.
Or we look for other opportunities
and compromises.
Remember that considering the roles in the team
everyone perceives the opposite critical relationship
in a different way.
It is important to remember it.
We will talk about personalities
and psychological states.
This course will help you to understand
each person's psychological state.
However, if we focus on the roles in the team
there are four doses of feedback.
The first dose is a glass.
People who perceive feedback critically
are not ready to perceive it in large pieces
because they close their eyes
and they worry about it.
They lose self-esteem.
The next dose is a type of people
who can catch not more than three points
of critical comments.
The previous one was just a little.
This type of people has not more than three points
of feedback.
These three points should be related
to each topic or three points to one topic.
There are variations.
However, you should not give more than three critical comments
to a person in a glass.
The consequences will be the same.
A person will close himself
and feel a strong internal pressure.
He will not have a trust relationship with you.
This is important in the team.
The next dose is a barrel.
People who can perceive feedback
are people with adequate self-esteem
who want to develop
and even demand it.
They say they want to improve
and they want to know everything.
When you give them a large amount of feedback
it does not strain them
because feedback helps them to develop.
It is believed that this category of employees
who get a barrel dose
with adequate self-esteem
and the most progressive category of employees
is the easiest to develop.
The last dose is a barrel.
These are employees who can get a large amount of feedback
and a crazy amount of feedback.
They can say anything they want
and do anything they want.
You probably have such a category of employees.
They will listen to you carefully
and will not be offended.
They will agree with you
and will not even try to correct their behavior.
We say in Russian that it is like peas in a pod.
You say what you want
and you will not be offended.
You will not even try to blame the person
for doing something wrong.
He will take everything as a peasant's barrel
and it will be impossible to observe
the result of his work and changes.
To give the right feedback to the right people
you should get acquainted with this topic
in the personality and psychological block.
Today we are talking about group dynamics.
Please, analyze and think about it.
You can open your notebook.
You have a task there.
You have to give the person
the type of feedback
and the role in front of you.
Let's summarize
what you have learned in the course
about group dynamics,
the development of the team and the role in the team.
To build an effective team
I listed for you 6 main points
with which you, as a leader
who builds an effective team
should work
and I emphasize, constantly.
1. Create a team role profile.
I told you how to create a team role profile.
There are surveyors for this.
You can attract training specialists
who will offer you these surveyors
and show you how to use them,
how to fill in, how to process
and how to use them in the future.
You won't need the help of external consultants.
You can do it yourself with the help of surveyors.
Your development is constant.
When you don't use surveyors,
you will remain professionals.
So, the team role profile.
As soon as you have created a team role profile,
please, analyze the missing roles
regarding the tasks.
For example, the role of a doctor,
a wire and a bumblebee.
The missing roles in the team
and how they affect the effectiveness of the work.
Look at the roles you lack at this stage.
If you have monotonous repetitive tasks
in your department,
the activizers and drivers
are not the most critical role.
You need specialists and professionals
who will do it from the beginning to the end
in a consistent and consistent way.
The next step is
to decide how to replace the missing roles.
Remember what Belbin said
and it proves the experience
and the practice
that the more diverse the role profile of your team,
the more effective the team works.
At the same time,
one person can perform several roles.
If you have a critical situation
and no one of the team members
can replace the missing role,
then you need to find such a person.
It is necessary to find him
not because of his professional competence
but because of his role.
It is necessary to find such a person
to perform the emotional role.
It is important
to evaluate the development of your team
at every stage.
I want to tell you
that there are many approaches
to this in the consulting and training business.
There are many surveyors
and tests that help the manager
to determine the stage of the team development.
The team fills the surveyor
in a cross-filling.
As a result, you see
the stage of your team.
We have discussed four stages.
Each stage has four management styles
that you need to apply.
As soon as you identify the stage of your team development,
you change your leadership style
regarding this stage.
The sixth and the last point
of the algorithm
is to change the management style
depending on the stage of the team development.
It is very important.
We have discussed four leadership styles.
It is very important to remember them.
I hope that you have learned
about the group dynamics,
the stages of the team development,
the roles and the distribution of roles in the team.
I hope that you will find it useful
to work with a team
and to develop the team.
Your daily work will be useful for you.
It will improve the efficiency of your team
and will lead your company
to a higher competitive level.
Good bye!